README.md, before:

# Dotfiles

A modern, lightweight, and modular dotfiles management system using Chezmoi for orchestration and best-in-class tools (aqua, mise, homebrew) for package management.

## Overview

This dotfiles repository provides a comprehensive solution for managing my development environment across multiple machines with a focus on:

- **Lightweight operation**: Everything runs on-demand, no background daemons
- **Modular design**: Clean separation of concerns with specialized tools
- **Cross-platform compatibility**: Works on macOS and Linux with OS-specific settings
- **Reproducibility**: Version-controlled configurations

## Core Components

### Chezmoi: The Orchestrator

[Chezmoi](https://www.chezmoi.io/) serves as the central orchestrator for the entire dotfiles ecosystem:

- Manages configuration files with templating support
- Runs scripts in a controlled, ordered manner
- Handles machine-specific differences
- Provides a consistent way to update configurations

### Tool Management

The repository integrates several specialized tools:

- **[Aqua](https://aquaproj.github.io/)**: Manages CLI binaries (kubectl, helm, etc.)
  - Speedy, lightweight, reproducible installation
  - Version-controlled binary management

- **[Mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/)**: Manages language SDKs and runtimes
  - Handles multiple versions of languages (Rust, Go, Node, Python, etc.)
  - Manages global tool installations via pipx, npm, etc.

- **[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)**: Manages system packages and GUI apps (macOS)
  - Uses Brewfile for reproducible installations
  - Handles GUI applications via Casks

## Getting Started

### Initial Setup

1. Install Chezmoi and initialize with this repository:

```bash
sh -c "$(curl -fsLS get.chezmoi.io)" -- init --apply ppat/dotfiles
```

2. Chezmoi will:
   - Install required tools (Homebrew, Aqua, Mise)
   - Set up environment files
   - Configure your shell and environment

### Manual Installation

If you prefer to set up step-by-step:

1. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ppat/dotfiles.git
   cd dotfiles
   ```

2. Install Chezmoi:

   ```bash
   sh -c "$(curl -fsLS get.chezmoi.io)"
   ```

3. Initialize Chezmoi with the local repository:

   ```bash
   chezmoi init --source=.
   chezmoi apply
   ```

Commit message:

refactor: various updates (#44)
- aqua
  - add packages: coder, minio, tailscale
  - update checksums
- bashrc
  - do not set or update enviroment vars that already contain the required value(s)
  - better error handling
- chezmoi scripts
  - make all scripts structure consistent
  - load only required env variables from chezmoi templates
  - change script names and output logging to reflect the tools being used
- docs 
  - simplify docs
  - add markdown lint to pre-commit
- environment variables
  - use mise configuration to load environment variables instead of hard coding loading in .bashrc
  - do not automatically load secrets from ~/.env.secrets, defer to opportunistic loading as needed
- kubeconfig creation
  - move secrets only needed for creating kubeconfig to that chezmoi script from ~/.env.secrets
- mise
  - add tasks: show-env, load-secrets

README.md, after:

# Dotfiles

A dotfiles management system using Chezmoi for orchestration and best-in-class tools (aqua, mise, homebrew) for package management.

## Overview

This dotfiles repository provides a way for managing my development environment across multiple machines with a focus on:

- **Lightweight operation**: Everything runs on-demand, no background daemons
- **Modular design**: Clean separation of concerns with specialized tools
- **Cross-platform compatibility**: Works on macOS and Linux with OS-specific settings
- **Reproducibility**: Version-controlled configurations

## Core Components

### Chezmoi: The Orchestrator

[Chezmoi](https://www.chezmoi.io/) serves as the central orchestrator for the entire dotfiles ecosystem:

- Manages configuration files with templating support
- Runs scripts in a controlled, ordered manner
- Handles machine-specific differences
- Provides a consistent way to update configurations

### Tool Management

The repository integrates several specialized tools:

- **[Aqua](https://aquaproj.github.io/)**: Manages CLI binaries (kubectl, helm, etc.)
  - Speedy, lightweight, reproducible installation
  - Version-controlled binary management
  - Packages: [.config/aquaproj-aqua/aqua.yaml](private_dot_config/aquaproj-aqua/aqua.yaml)

- **[Mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/)**: Manages language SDKs and runtimes
  - Handles multiple versions of languages (Rust, Go, Node, Python, etc.)
  - Manages global tool installations via pipx, npm, etc.
  - Packages: [.config/mise/config.toml](private_dot_config/mise/config.toml)

- **[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/)**: Manages system packages and GUI apps (macOS)
  - Uses Brewfile for reproducible installations
  - Handles GUI applications via Casks
  - Packages:
    - System: [Brewfile.system](Brewfile.system)
    - Docker: [Brewfile.docker](Brewfile.docker)
    - GUI: [Brewfile.gui](Brewfile.gui)

- **[Krew](https://krew.sigs.k8s.io/)**: Manages kubectl plugins (ctx, ns, stern, etc.)
  - Uses a simple text file listing required plugins
  - Packages: [krew-plugins.txt](krew-plugins.txt)

## Getting Started

### Initial Setup

Install Chezmoi and initialize with this repository:

```bash
sh -c "$(curl -fsLS get.chezmoi.io)" -- init --apply ppat/dotfiles
```

Chezmoi will:

- Install required tools (Homebrew, Aqua, Mise)
- Set up environment files
- Configure your shell and environment

### Ongoing updates

To update system/environment with latest version from git,

```bash
chezmoi update
```

Chezmoi will:

- Fetch latest from git
- Apply all the updates
